API design: Live query endpoint for ad-hoc queries (#16792)
fleetdm/fleet: docs/REST API/rest-api.md

- [Get host's disk encryption key](#get-hosts-disk-encryption-key)
- [Get host's past activity](#get-hosts-past-activity)
- [Get host's upcoming activity](#get-hosts-upcoming-activity)

> - [Live query one host (ad-hoc)](#live-query-one-host-ad-hoc)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Live query host by identifier (ad-hoc)](#live-query-host-by-identifier-ad-hoc)
```

> - [Live query one host (ad-hoc)](#live-query-one-host-ad-hoc)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Live query one host (ad-hoc)](#live-query-one-host-ad-hoc)
- [Live query host by identifier (ad-hoc)](#live-query-host-by-identifier-ad-hoc)
```

}
```

### Live query one host (ad-hoc)

Runs an ad-hoc live query against the specified host and responds with the results.

The live query will stop if the targeted host hasn't responded after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

> `POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query`

Author: ```suggestion
`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query/live`
```

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| id       | integer   | path | **Required**. The ID of the host to target. |

> | query    | string    | body | The query SQL. |

Author: ```suggestion
| query    | string    | body | **Required**. The query SQL. |
```

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/123/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",

>   "results": [

Author: TODO: fill this in w/ example @rachaelshaw

}
```

### Live query one host (ad-hoc)

Runs an ad-hoc live query against the specified host and responds with the results.

The live query will stop if the targeted host is offline, or hasn't responded after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

> `POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:identifier/query`

Author: ```suggestion
`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query`
```

> `POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:identifier/query`

Reviewer: For consistency we used `/api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/:identifier/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | identifier       | integer or string   | path | **Required**. The host's `hardware_serial`, `uuid`, `osquery_host_id`, `hostname`, or `node_key`

Author: ```suggestion
| id       | integer   | path | **Required**. The target host ID. |
```

| query    | string    | body | The query SQL. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/123/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",
  "results": [

>     // TODO

Author: ```suggestion
```

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| identifier       | integer  | path | **Required**. The target host ID. |
| query            | string   | body | **Required**. The query SQL. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/123/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",
  "status": "online", // "online" or "offline"
  "error": null,
  "rows": [
    {
      "model": "USB2.0 Hub",
      "vendor": "VIA Labs, Inc."
    }
  ]
}
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Note that if the host is online and the query times out, this endpoint will return an error and `rows` will be `null`. If the host is offline, no error will be returned, and `rows` will be an empty array (`[]`).

```
@lucasmrod is this correct?

Reviewer: One small amend:

> If the host is offline, no error will be returned, and `status` will be `offline` and `rows` will be `null`.

E.g.
```sh
curl -v -k -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $TEST_TOKEN" https://localhost:8080/api/latest/fleet/hosts/identifier/lucass-macbook-pro.local/query -d '{"query": "SELECT sleep(60);"}'
{
  "host_id": 3908,
  "rows": null,
  "query": "SELECT * from osquery_info;",
  "status": "offline"
}
```

Reviewer: > Note that if the host is online and the query times out, this endpoint will return an error and `rows` will be `null`.

And when it times out the error is always `"error": "timeout waiting for results"`.

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/:identifier/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| identifier       | integer or string   | path | **Required**. The host's `hardware_serial`, `uuid`, `osquery_host_id`, `hostname`, or `node_key`. |
| query            | string   | body | **Required**. The query SQL. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/392547dc-0000-0000-a87a-d701ff75bc65/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",
  "status": "online", // "online" or "offline"
  "error": null,
  "rows": [
    {
      "model": "USB2.0 Hub",
      "vendor": "VIA Labs, Inc."
    }
  ]
}
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Note that if the host is online and the query times out, this endpoint will return an error and `rows` will be `null`. If the host is offline, no error will be returned, and `rows` will be`null`.

```

}
```

### Live query one host (ad-hoc)

Runs an ad-hoc live query against the specified host and responds with the results.

> The live query will stop if the targeted host is offline, or hasn't responded after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

Author: The live query will stop if the targeted host is offline, or if the query times out. Timeouts happen if the host hasn't responded after the configured `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD` (default 25 seconds) or if the `distributed_interval` agent option (default 10 seconds) is higher than the `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD`.

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/:identifier/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| identifier       | integer or string   | path | **Required**. The host's `hardware_serial`, `uuid`, `osquery_host_id`, `hostname`, or `node_key`. |
| query            | string   | body | **Required**. The query SQL. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/392547dc-0000-0000-a87a-d701ff75bc65/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",
  "status": "online", // "online" or "offline"
  "error": null,
  "rows": [
    {
      "model": "USB2.0 Hub",
      "vendor": "VIA Labs, Inc."
    }
  ]
}
```

> Note that if the host is online and the query times out, this endpoint will return an error and `rows` will be `null`. If the host is offline, no error will be returned, and `rows` will be`null`.

Reviewer: Nit: Missing space after be`null`

}
```

### Live query one host (ad-hoc)

Runs an ad-hoc live query against the specified host and responds with the results.

The live query will stop if the targeted host is offline, or hasn't responded after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| identifier       | integer  | path | **Required**. The target host ID. |
| query            | string   | body | **Required**. The query SQL. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/123/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",

>   "status": "offline",

Reviewer: Let's document the two possible values (`online`/`offline`).

  "error": null,
  "rows": []
}
```

### Live query host by identifier (ad-hoc)

Runs an ad-hoc live query against a host identified using `uuid` and responds with the results.

> The live query will stop if the targeted host is offline, or hasn't responded after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

Reviewer: Let's document that this could happen if the `distributed_interval` seconds in the agent settings is set higher than the configured `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD` (defaults values are 10s and 25s respectively).

Author: @lucasmrod guessing that's also the case for the existing live query endpoint? https://fleetdm.com/docs/rest-api/rest-api#run-live-query

Author: Maybe:

```suggestion
The live query will stop if the targeted host is offline, or the query times out. Timeouts happen if the host hasn't responded after the configured `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD` (default 25 seconds) or if the `distributed_interval` agent option (default 10 seconds) is higher than the `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD`.
```
(feels kinda wordy though; I wonder if there's somewhere we can document this info for all 3 endpoints)

Reviewer: Looks good!

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/:identifier/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | identifier       | integer or string   | path | **Required**. The host's `uuid`. |

Reviewer: We ended up implementing the original request, hardware_serial, hostname, etc.

Author: ```suggestion
| identifier       | integer or string   | path | **Required**. The host's `hardware_serial`, `uuid`, `osquery_host_id`, `hostname`, or `node_key`. |
```

| query            | string   | body | **Required**. The query SQL. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/identifier/392547dc-0000-0000-a87a-d701ff75bc65/query`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

```json
{
  "host_id": 123,
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;",
  "status": "offline",
  "error": null,
  "rows": []

> }

Reviewer: When the timeout is hit and the host hasn't responded, the following will be returned:
```json
{
  "host_id": 3908,
  "rows": null,
  "query": "SELECT * FROM usb_device;",
  "status": "online",
  "error": "timeout waiting for results"
}
```

Reviewer 2: This can happen if the host just went offline when the query was run.

- [Delete query by ID](#delete-query-by-id)
- [Delete queries](#delete-queries)
- [Run live query](#run-live-query)

> - [Run custom live query](#run-custom-live-query)

Author: ```suggestion
```

}
```

### Run live query (ad-hoc)

Runs a custom live query against the specified hosts and responds with the results.

If some targeted hosts haven't responded, the live query will stop and return all collected results after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query`

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| host_id | integer   | path | **Required**. The IDs of the host to target. |
| query    | string  | body | The query SQL if running a custom query. May not be used with `query_id`. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/queries/custom`

##### Request body

```json
{
  "query": "SELECT model, vendor FROM usb_devices;"
}
```

##### Default response

`Status: 200`

> ```json

Author: TODO: fix

}
```

> ### Run custom live query

Author: ```suggestion
### Run live query (ad-hoc)
```

Runs a custom live query against the specified hosts and responds with the results.

If some targeted hosts haven't responded, the live query will stop and return all collected results after 25 seconds (or whatever time period is configured via environment variable, e.g. `FLEET_LIVE_QUERY_REST_PERIOD=90s`).

> `POST /api/v1/fleet/queries/custom`

Author: Or possibly:
```suggestion
`POST /api/v1/fleet/queries/custom/run`
```
(reminder: `/queries/run` is already in use by the websocket endpoint, so that's off the table)

> `POST /api/v1/fleet/queries/custom`

Author: ```suggestion
`POST /api/v1/fleet/hosts/:id/query`
```

#### Parameters

| Name      | Type  | In   | Description                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|-------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | host_ids | array   | body | **Required**. The IDs of the hosts to target. User must be authorized to target all of these hosts. |

Author: ```suggestion
| host_id | integer   | path | **Required**. The IDs of the host to target. |
```

| query    | string  | body | The query SQL if running a custom query. May not be used with `query_id`. |

#### Example

`POST /api/v1/fleet/queries/custom`

##### Request body

```json
{

>   "host_ids": [ 1, 4, 34, 27 ],

Author: ```suggestion
```
